Hello, my name is Andrey Kulinich.
I have been engaged in both theoretical and practical aspects of marketing for more than a year.
Today's course, the life cycle and positioning of the product, the product portfolio, included almost all my experience on this topic.
In this course, we will talk about the first section, the product, concept, form and characteristics.
The second section is about the accompanying goods and services.
The third section is about the life cycle of the goods and markets.
The fourth section is about the assortment policy of the company, what the product portfolio should be.
Let's outline the goals of this course.
First of all, we should learn how to properly form the product policy of the company,
which means to master the skills of both analysis and planning of the product portfolio.
To do this, we need to understand the life cycle of the goods, characteristics of the goods,
and to master the methods of working with different types of products, to understand their features.
So, the traditional definition of the goods is the material or non-material benefit sold to the company.
But this definition has been transformed, changed and changed over time.
And now the most relevant definition is any offer presented on the market,
be it a material benefit or a service.
That is, everything you can exchange, offer to the market, is now understood as a product.
In particular, it is not necessarily a certain item, it is either a service or information.
There are two extremes.
These are material goods and non-material goods.
But the world is not divided into black and white.
In fact, there are both material goods, like the remote control I hold in my hands.
There are goods that are a companion to the service.
In particular, the hotel business is nothing more than a commodity that accompanies the service.
The information that is a carrier.
When you buy a newspaper, you do not buy it for the paper.
No, no, paper will also come in handy in the household, no doubt.
But the main thing is that what is written in this newspaper is information.
A CD, music is not a carrier.
That is, we buy a carrier.
In this case, a material product is nothing more than a carrier of a non-material service, an inedible product.
On the other hand, there are services for providing goods.
In particular, when you buy a car, you will have to contact a car dealer.
He provides services for delivering, providing goods to you.
It makes the goods available.
Services that accompany the goods.
Construction.
If you build a private house, you actually order a construction service.
But in the end you get a product.
A house, a cottage, a bathhouse.
Inedible services.
In particular, any consulting services are inedible.
You cannot feel them, try to assess them.
It is important to understand that any product or service has not only a material or informational value,
but also a symbolic value.
Pay attention to the slide.
A seemingly simple product like a prunes has a deep symbolic value.
Looking at it, we have associations with old age, wrinkles, impotence.
All this limits the sale, stops the buyer from buying.
But there are also positive emotions, positive symbolism.
Expensive cars, watches, rolexes are symbols.
These are symbols belonging to a certain class, wealth and power.
If you look at the goods in a broader way, you will see several aspects.
First of all, it is the concept of the goods.
The essence.
In the future, this concept will be surrounded by components of the goods.
That is, they will be divided into separate functions, properties and characteristics.
Sensory unity.
These are tactile sensations.
Taste, smell, what kind of product to touch.
We must discuss and write down these aspects.
Packaging.
The product is extremely important.
From the point of view of the choice of this product for the customer,
and from the point of view of promotion, from the point of view of its availability on the shelf of the store.
The overall quality of the offer.
Here it is necessary to consider not only the essence of the product,
but also the packaging and services that may accompany this product.
What services will the consumer need when purchasing this product?
The accompanying services.
Some of them, we will talk about a little later, will be included in the free basic package.
What can a customer buy with an additional fee?
The trademark.
This is also an important aspect of the product.
In fact, the product is a large number of questions.
The auxiliary device, the name of the brand, how we will process the claims,
what size will our product be, in what packaging, instructions,
what will be written on the packaging, what warranty period will we provide, design.
All these questions we need to solve when we decide to restart the product on the market.
But it starts, first of all, with positioning the product.
What is the position of the product?
This is how your product is perceived by the customer.
This is the position in his head.
This is not how you imagine or want to position your product.
In no case.
This is exactly how your product is perceived by the customer.
It is important to understand.
It's like a clue.
Think, remember.
If you were choosing a reliable car now, which three brands come to your mind?
These are the positions.
If you were choosing a good hotel, which three hotel names come to your mind?
These are the clues.
These are the positions of the product.
There are three ways to determine the position of the product.
First, it is a reinforcement of the position already found in the head of the consumer.
How they perceive it.
Great.
It is much easier to work with this.
It is important to inform the consumer that we are who we are.
To consolidate this position.
Search for a free niche among competitors.
Through differentiation.
Through differences.
We look at the products on the market.
How they are positioned.
How they are perceived by the customers.
What products are missing?
What positions are still available?
Accordingly, we can put our product on this position.
The third option is to replace the competitor with a certain position.
The process is not easy, but possible.
So, positioning is possible.
First of all, based on emotional values.
And considering the reduction of the importance of differentiation,
the products become very similar to each other.
The emotional aspect is now very often the first priority.
The price-quality ratio.
The perceived quality, the price, is also an important aspect that we will talk about.
Why not?
From the point of view of use.
Where, how, on what issues is a particular product used.
Positioning should be done taking into account the needs of the product.
The needs of the customer.
The needs of the competitors.
The needs of the positions that are occupied by the competitors.
And the product class.
Price, emotional, and so on.
What is your product?
Why is positioning necessary?
First of all, to answer what position we occupy.
And where should we put our efforts?
A product that has no position usually has no sustainable growth prospects.
Positioning is not segmentation.
It is a refusal of something for the better service of the clients for whom your position is important.
Quality is a bad basis for positioning.
The theory of positioning was developed by two scientists, L. Rice and Jack Trout.
You can find more detailed information in their books.
But first of all, they stated, and I agree with them, that quality is a bad basis for positioning.
Why?
Because we perceive quality in a completely different way.
Say, Mercedes is a reliable car.
I am sure that I will not be divided.
Moreover, if I ask you why you decided that the quality is great or negative,
it will turn out that almost each of you judged by your own criteria.
The number of breakdowns on a thousand sold cars,
service life, color, metal, engine sound,
quality of interior upholstery,
quality of acoustics in the car.
There can be many criteria for quality.
Therefore, the quality is a rather soft criterion and does not fit the point of view of positioning.
But what can we take as a basis?
We can take the product itself.
The shape of the product or its properties can be a great way to differentiate from competitors
and, accordingly, to position in the consumer's head.
Pay attention, Apple is trying to adjust to this.
That is, interesting shapes, unique design,
product properties, convenient to use.
Look at the success of Apple.
It not only leads in the field of computers for professional designers,
but it also occupies niches of quite expensive portable audio equipment,
I mean MP3 players.
It has become a cellular communication.
It is these competencies that use their position.
The efficiency of use, comfort of use,
and durability of the product can also serve as a basis for positioning.
Services can be a great basis for positioning.
The world is accelerating, accelerating.
Often we are looking for simple, quick solutions.
The simplicity of ordering.
The simplicity of ordering a book through an Internet site.
The simplicity of payment by mobile phone.
The simplicity of receiving a bank loan.
Receiving a loan can serve as a basis for positioning,
as a basis for differentiating from competitors.
Let's give an example.
Now many banks, on the one hand,
complicate the requirements to the borrower,
and on the other hand,
they try to tell us that it is easy to receive an order.
For example, Delta Credit.
They say that it is enough for you to come to their bank only twice.
The first time is to provide documents,
the second time is to sign or make a deal.
That's it. It's very simple.
They don't take your time.
This distinguishes them from many competitors
and long trips to the bank,
communication, standing in lines.
Delivery.
Pay attention.
Many stores are now saying that it is not cheap,
but we deliver goods within three hours.
Not three days, but three hours.
Is it important for you?
Not for everyone, not always,
but it can also be a basis for positioning.
Staff.
This is also a position that can be taken in the consumer's head.
For example,
if you decide to focus on the segment of expats,
foreigners in Russia,
then your staff speaks two, three or four languages.
Is it hard?
Maybe.
But in this case,
all these clients will automatically choose you,
if they have a problem with Russian.
It is always more pleasant to communicate,
receive services or goods,
and order in your native language.
Pay attention.
Reliability, reliability, communication.
All these can be a basis for positioning in the client's head.
Channel.
It can also be a basis for positioning in the consumer's head.
A good example is cosmetics.
It can be sold in shopping centers,
through consultants,
through the so-called network channel, MLM.
This is a way to differentiate.
It is not sold in retail.
It can only be bought from our consultants.
Yes, the measure was forced for Avon, Mary Kay.
They did not find a place on shelves in stores.
But maybe this has become an important distinguishing feature.
Perhaps it was this channel,
channel differentiation,
that allowed them to become one of the leaders of the cosmetic industry.
Image.
It is definitely a basis for positioning.
Remember the recently burned down Diagilev club.
Positioning.
The most expensive, the most glamorous.
Accordingly, this position, this offer,
was made for the clients for whom it was important.
Yes, the club had its own atmosphere,
and special events were held in the club.
Exclusive performances of stars,
special party, and so on.
What are the conditions for the correct positioning?
Here you need to know a few rules.
First of all, look at the sides.
What position do your competitors occupy?
It is desirable to find your own unique position.
But it is important to understand
that this position should be important for your clients.
To arouse interest.
Otherwise, I'm afraid
that you won't be able to position
that will bring you profit.
Accordingly, the next question.
Will this position allow you to extract enough profit?
What segment, what purchasing power
will your position be important for?
How much can you argue your position?
What arguments do you have to defend your position?
How easy is it to convey them?
How clear is your idea of the degree of vulnerability?
How quickly can competitors copy this position?
How can they undermine your position?
What will be their counteraction?
How does the current position coincide
with the existing positioning of the product?
Will you have to make a serious mistake?
How confident are you
that the product corresponds to the stated position?
There are also several important postulates
that you need to remember in the process of positioning.
The first one is that human abilities are limited.
Rice et al. claim that in the head of a person
there are only three cells for each position.
You remember three brands of reliable cars spontaneously.
You remember three brands of sports cars.
But only three come to your mind at once.
And this three plays an important role in your choice.
In order to take the place in the head of the consumer,
if all three cells are occupied,
you will have to move someone.
So your argument, your position should be stronger,
you should be more aggressive
than the competitor who occupies one of the three cells.
Although there may be obvious positions.
Remember the H&S ad.
Call the shampoo from the Perhoti number two.
This is a hint to their competitors.
It is important to understand that consciousness loves simplicity.
The clearer, the easier it is to prove to you,
the faster you will take this position.
If you explain to the consumer
that your product is better in terms of the integral factor,
and so on,
Oh, how difficult!
I don't need difficulties.
Life is not so difficult.
Just tell me what you are different from.
Here comes to my mind the advertising concept of Budweiser beer.
In the 1930s, they had problems with the sale of beer.
The Czech Republic, the competitors, everyone has good beer.
How to sell, how to differentiate, how to position?
Although there were no such terms at that time,
they tried to use the current approaches we are talking about.
I think that someone jokingly suggested to consultants
to indicate in the ad that they wash bottles.
They wash bottles with steam.
They indicated.
Sales have increased sharply.
The rest had to prove that they also wash bottles.
But it was just a weak excuse.
The mind of a person is full of doubts.
And you will have to prove your position every time.
But the most important thing is to win this position.
If I come to you and say that the training on MBA Start course is very high quality and effective.
You will tell me right away why.
You are trying to pressure me.
You are trying to impose your opinion on me.
And I will need to have a number of arguments to prove.
Get ready for evidence.
Get ready to translate murderous arguments to your clients.
But the important aspect is that the mind is constant.
If your brand has steadily taken up a certain niche,
it is quite difficult to remove it from there.
Which cars are the safest?
Volvo.
Please note that Volvo cars are not the safest for more than a decade.
It is the competence to make safe cars.
Other car manufacturers have also mastered it.
But the position is so simple in our consciousness
that the first association is usually a safe car.
It is Volvo.
Volkswagen, speaking of cars,
tried to reposition its brand and transfer it to a category.
To one category with Mercedes and BMW.
Alas, it turned out to be extremely difficult.
Volkswagen is an inexpensive car.
It is written in the name.
And even a wide-scale advertising concept could not change its position.
Many brands are suffering from such diseases.
Samsung spends billions, if I'm not mistaken,
2-3 billion dollars a year on global advertising budgets.
But it cannot change the perception in the world
that it is not an elite or premium brand,
but at least a strong middleman.
The world perceives it as an inexpensive Korean car.
And this is not the first year of the war.
In terms of positioning,
extremely simple tools are used
either to find a free niche or to distribute goods in the current positions.
For example, pay attention to the site.
This is a positioning table.
This is a conditional market structuring,
where we try to distribute goods in several categories.
First of all, by price.
Expensive, acceptable, inexpensive.
But we can also distribute food by groups.
Traditional cuisine and products similar to it.
High-calorie food, artificial products, natural and dietary products.
Next, we look for where our competitors are.
Where is a free niche,
or where is not enough competition,
where there is a place in three cells in the consumer's head.
The most popular tool is the positioning matrix,
or sometimes it is called the perception matrix.
In two axes.
Most often it is the price-quality ratio.
But it can be axes, if you return to family, sports cars,
or for the city, for the countryside.
Pay attention to the two axes, two extremes,
not necessarily related to the price.
By distributing the competitors' positions
by the Euler circles,
applying the perception matrix,
we can find positions with high competition,
positions with low competition,
and possibly a free niche.
Moreover, these approaches can be used not only for market structuring,
but also for the structuring of your own portfolio,
in order to distribute brands in the consumer's head.
If you do not do this,
there is an internal competition, an internal cannibalism,
when three brands are fighting for your client's wallet,
and all three are yours.
Why?
Why do you need this?
Your costs are three times higher,
but you will not earn money anymore.
It is important that the goods do not compete with each other.
We have a good story.
At one time, General Motors released five of its sub-brands
to free swimming.
It was believed that they would be easier to survive in the market
due to their flexibility.
What did the brands do?
They tried to find the largest,
profitable and intensively growing segment.
It turned out to be middle-class cars.
After a short time,
it turned out that all five brands,
which had previously unique positions,
competed in one segment due to one consumer,
with little difference.
General Motors lost the traditional markets for itself
and began to compete with itself.
This led to certain financial problems.
You can use profiles.
Look for the differences between your goods.
Build a profile that is different from the competitors'
and look for clients who will accept this profile.
I want to repeat that positioning is a refusal of something.
Positioning is a persistent reaction of the consumer
to the image of your product,
to its brand, to its name.
It is a hint of what is associated with your product.
Have your position and your sales will grow.
We talked about positioning.
Now let's talk about the method of positioning,
for example, through design.
What options can be designed?
What criteria should be satisfied by design?
First of all, there are five main ones.
Functionality and ergonomics.
Design should be convenient for the consumer.
It should be functional.
It should be convenient.
Design should allow you to use your device effectively.
On the other hand,
if we are talking about cars,
design should allow engineers to place power units inside,
to ensure the safety of passengers.
Social adaptation.
Design should meet the social group's requirements,
in which it will be sold and distributed.
If we talk about the middle class,
these are the same requirements for design.
If we talk about the high-end,
design will have different features.
Design's appearance and appeal.
Why not?
But note that not all people should like design.
What everyone likes is the same for everyone.
Identificability.
Your product should be easily identifiable by its appearance.
Let's go back to cars.
For many years,
from one model to another,
they have been moving the grilles and headlights
to make these products easily identifiable by consumers.
So that you can immediately determine
what kind of product it is, what kind of car it is.
If we talk about the types of design,
then industrial design,
product design, technological design,
packaging design,
which is actually an element of promotion,
corporate design,
which is the company's logo,
a brand book with a description
of how business cards,
advertising,
and business cards should be designed,
environmental design,
or commercial architecture.
That is, landscape design,
design of your office,
and design around it.
Website design,
or Internet design.
If we talk about packaging,
it is also important to say
that there are three types of packaging.
The primary one
is the one that contacts the product itself.
Let's take a chewing gum.
In particular,
it is either chocolate,
but wrapped in foil.
That is, this is the primary packaging
that contacts the chocolate.
There is another layer of packaging behind the foil.
The secondary one.
The secondary layer of packaging usually
is a product of high quality
and has an informational and advertising nature.
It contains the necessary information
about the manufacturer,
the shelf life, the composition,
and other things.
The third packaging,
or what is called a transport packaging,
serves to ensure that the product
is not damaged during the movement,
or this movement can be carried out
more effectively.
In particular, boxes,
boxes for bottles,
and so on.
When designing,
you should take into account
two important functions of packaging.
First of all, technical protection
and safety of the product.
These are your losses.
Minimizing losses will allow you
to earn more or make a more competitive price.
The convenience of use,
both for end customers
and intermediaries.
Transport and storage
are very important aspects.
Why? Russia is a huge country
and many losses occur
during transportation.
Packaging allows
to minimize them.
Placing and utilization
are two aspects at the same time.
Placing is how the product can be stored
and where it can be in the shopping mall.
In particular,
if you plan to place the product
in the order zone,
this is one form of packaging.
If it is placed on shelves,
think about how easy
it is to utilize your packaging
and whether it pollutes the environment.
Potentially,
it can become a competitive advantage.
Communication.
In particular,
packaging influences our choice
or perception of the quality of the product.
You should include
such elements as
recognizability,
positioning,
packaging, design.
In this case,
both primary and secondary packaging
should emphasize
the position of your product.
Consumer information.
What is written
on the packaging?
Where is it made?
Under whose control?
What is included in the product?
Perhaps, packaging should stimulate.
In particular,
if you remember,
or if you have children,
in the boxes with sweet balls
sometimes there are
various toys
or games that can be cut
directly from the packaging.
Such moves
allow to increase
sales, because it is attractive
for children.
When designing a packaging,
you should understand the rules of using colors.
In fact, almost all colors
are perceived differently by consumers.
They have both advantages
and disadvantages.
Let's look at the red one.
On the one hand,
it is a color that evokes passion,
which is dynamic,
revolutionary,
but on the other hand
it is associated with blood,
fire, war,
the color of the devil.
Will it play a negative role
in terms of the perception of the product
or packaging by consumers?
The white color is innocence,
perfection,
and on the other hand it is emptiness,
silence, and elusiveness.
You should understand how colors combine.
The packaging should not be overloaded
with colors and look like something
too flashy.
It is advisable to use no more than three colors.
There are certain tricks
that you can clarify with designers.
For example,
the best color is perceived
as yellow on black.
We pick it up.
You should understand
and use
your packaging.
Let's try to make a small building
for self-check.
In particular, I will ask you
to classify the goods
offered by the restaurant
as goods of long-term use
or as services.
Explain your answer.
Task 2.
Recently, many European and American
car manufacturers
reposition their trademarks.
Think about the examples of such repositioning.
Describe how
a particular trademark
moved to the upper
or lower segment of the market.
How easily did companies
reposition it?
What else could they do
to change the attitude
of consumers to their cars?
To change their position?
Task 3.
Why do most people prefer
trademarked goods
over non-trademarked ones?
Explain your answer.
Let's look at the section
on accompanying services.
Here we will talk about
how to define the list
of additional services
for your offer.
Accompanying services are a set
of additional services
that add additional value
to the product for the consumer
and are a source of possible differentiation.
It is important to understand
that there are three types
of additional services.
The first one is
the reception,
the consumer's
care,
the information about the offer,
the advice on buying or consulting,
and the processing of special cases
of customer's request.
Yes, the promotion of the product
and the message about it
are also important services
that often cannot be sold
without.
The second one is the services
to ensure the deal.
It is the acceptance of the order
or the booking of the product for you,
the payment, the receipt of money.
Let's go back to the example
about cars.
Here we can face
the information
that there is a similar model,
some characteristics.
You can get a consultation
when choosing a car
on which you should
stop your choice.
When you come to the car dealership,
you need to place the order
or book a car
that is sailing on a ferry.
You also need to transfer the money.
These services are provided
by the car dealership.
The third one is the services
to ensure the customer's after-sales service.
It is related to the guarantee,
the guarantee,
the quality confirmation
or the reduction of the level of concern
whether you have made the purchase.
It is the technical service,
the processing of claims,
as well as the promotion
of loyalty.
There are three approaches
to the formation of the
after-sales package.
The first approach is functional.
Roughly speaking,
what additional services
or basic services
the consumer needs
to be able to use the product
and purchase it.
It is a minimalistic approach.
The second approach is the client approach.
What services are valuable for the client
and what services are valuable for the client?
What does the client expect to see
along with the product?
What services does the client want to receive?
The third approach is competitive.
In this case,
we try to adjust
the services
from our competitor.
For example,
we offer free service as a basic service.
We can offer it for money.
It is possible to differentiate
our offer.
The third approach is a few-level service.
In particular,
it is the core of the offer.
It is what we offer to the consumer
and what is the basis.
Next, it is surrounded by basic
accompanying services.
Without them,
the core loses its value
and cannot be provided to the consumer.
Additional free accompanying services
are what we offer to the client
based on the three approaches
we have mentioned above.
They are functional, competitive,
and client-based.
Additional free accompanying services
can be provided to the consumer
for money and additional fee.
Cars are a good example.
A car is a core of the offer.
However,
without basic accompanying services
such as consulting,
receiving an order,
booking, and receiving a fee,
we cannot purchase it.
Therefore, a car is inextricably linked
to the services.
Additional free services
are what we can provide to the consumer.
In particular,
it is pre-sale preparation of the car,
it is possible
to consult
after the sale
on the use of the car,
and so on.
Additional services
that we can provide to the consumer
are installation
of additional equipment,
it is possible
to treat the car
with anti-corrosion components
if it is necessary.
There are several stages,
to be exact, five,
which allow us to determine
the policy of the accompanying services.
First of all,
we should determine
what our clients expect from us.
It is quite possible
that depending on the client segment
the set of basic and additional services
will be different.
Second, we should analyze
the ability of the company
to perform these services
and assess the costs
that we will incur.
Third, we should determine
additional services
that will be included
in the basic set
and that we will provide separately
for additional fee.
Fourth, we should consider
the possibility of differentiating
between the different segments.
It is possible that depending on the client type
we can offer something
in the basic set,
something with additional fee.
For another client,
this set will be different.
And, of course, fifth,
we should develop a program
of providing these services,
organize internal processes,
if it is not possible within the company,
find partners to outsource
these processes.
I would like to ask you
to complete a small task.
Remember the recently purchased
expensive goods,
furniture, household appliances,
interior items,
and what types of
accompanying services
were marked by you
in the purchase process.
Life cycle of goods and markets
Let's move on to the third section
of the Life Cycle of Goods and Markets.
Here we will consider the concept
of the life cycle
and try to learn
to use it in practice.
The life cycle
is a beautiful graph
that reflects the volume
of product sales
on the market
depending on its shelf life.
It is important to understand
that everything appears
and disappears.
It is a dialectic of our life.
There are peaks,
which reach the volume of sales,
there are stages
which reach the peak
and then decrease the volume of sales.
Each stage has
its own actions
or optimal actions
of the company
that allow you to achieve the maximum effect.
In particular,
one of the problems of the life cycle
is that there is no formula
that allows you to calculate
where you are on this graph,
at what stage of the life cycle
your product or market is.
You can determine it by indirect signs.
At the launch stage,
as a rule, sales are very difficult,
no one is familiar with the product yet,
the acquisition of each client
is very expensive,
there are few competitors,
but the segmentation and positioning
of this product is not yet clear.
At the stage of rapid growth,
a rough segmentation is already taking place,
that is, a fairly simplified one.
The product, perhaps,
is being finalized
taking into account the first
sales experience,
the volume of sales is growing rapidly,
the cost of acquisition of the client is decreasing.
At the stage of maturity,
as a rule,
the competition is getting bigger,
the products are starting to differ
between each other,
the segmentation is already detailed
and the competition on the market
is quite high.
On the declining market,
as a rule, the competition is also decreasing,
but the number of offers
of companies that survive
is extremely small.
Let's look at the life cycle
using the example of mobile phones.
For example, in the late 90s
in any cell phone salon
it was considered a good offer
if there were about 10 models,
if simplified,
each manufacturer
had 2 models of the phone.
Expensive and inaccessible.
If you look at cell phone salons now,
you will see that the range
from 10 positions
has grown to several hundred.
And this is a very good
result.
Several hundred.
The range of some manufacturers
reaches
50-60 models of phones.
That is,
at the first stage, sales were small,
products were poorly differentiated,
that is, the segmentation
of clients was quite rough
and simplified.
Expensive and inexpensive phones.
Then, at the stage of growth
and the number of manufacturers increased,
competition increased,
and the market improved.
Now, at the stage of maturity,
it is almost difficult for a new player
to come out, because the market
is ruled by large players
who have the effect of scale
and the ability to develop new products.
But the products themselves,
that is, mobile phones,
are very narrowly segmented.
Not just this phone
for business,
but for the ordinary consumer.
You can find 5-6 offers
from a communicator to a stylish business class phone.
You can find phones
for ordinary consumers,
if I can put it this way.
Some are light,
some with a flashlight,
with large numbers, letters.
That is, each phone is oriented
to a specific segment.
It is difficult to predict
when the market will pass
the sunset of cellular communication.
It will go down,
but with the addition of very large players,
which will reduce the profitability,
and the focus or segmentation
will decrease.
The life cycle does not always
look like a beautiful,
smooth curve.
In fact, there are several types
of life cycle.
The life cycle of a newbie,
a newbie who is unsuccessful,
who has not lived to the stage
of maturity and decline,
a rapid surge
and a rapid decline.
Perhaps this is due to the fact
that the product
was not competitive
even on the growing market.
If you pay attention to the slide,
you will see that even at the stage
of the life cycle,
such as growth,
products can leave the market.
That is, the sales of
Thompson computers
first went along with the market growth,
then the company lost
its share and market position.
This can be a restart
or a renewal
of the life cycle.
In particular, on the slide you see
that in general the life cycle
of the sale of tobacco products
is already declining,
but the new product of the sale
of the life cycle of Malboro cigarettes
is growing.
If you remember,
the life cycle is very well
demonstrated by the example
of TVs.
In particular, black and white
TV receivers were growing
and declining, but then the market
began to grow due to the sale
of colored TVs, and now
the market growth is due to the sale
of plastic TVs.
That is, if you look
at specific models,
at specific technologies,
then their life cycle is shorter
than the life cycle
of TV receivers.
Why? Because in general
the TV market is at the stage
of growth.
What is the advantage of the life cycle?
First of all, it allows you to get
a certain dynamic vision of the market
and anticipate its changes,
that is, to plan your actions in advance.
It allows you to recognize
the situation and, accordingly,
to take adequate actions
depending on the stage
of the life cycle.
It allows you to better analyze
your portfolio and plan
the withdrawal of old goods
and the introduction of new ones.
It contributes to a better understanding
of the markets, and therefore
to a better strategic analysis.
The life cycle of goods should be
understood as a convenient analogy,
not as a law imposed
on enterprises and their goods.
There are quite a lot of assumptions here.
I ask you to complete the task
for self-checking
in the following order.
Task 5.
Less than one third of new goods
reach the buyer.
Is such a low percentage
in contradiction with the philosophy
and concept of marketing
to find a need and satisfy it?
Explain why.
Task 6.
In recent studies,
it was suggested that
the consumption of oatmeal,
along with the increase
in the number of oatmeal products,
reduces the level of cholesterol.
Explain what effect
this healing property
can have on the life cycle
of oatmeal and goods based on oats?
Task 7.
What is the concept of assortment?
Let's look at our fourth section,
which is titled
Assortment Policy.
Here we will look at the concept of assortment,
what is the characteristic of an assortment,
the level of an assortment.
We will try to determine the direction
of the assortment,
as well as what methods
are used to analyze the assortment
and how to correctly exclude
low-profit or low-attractive goods.
In particular, an assortment is a set of goods
that are connected to each other
and that have the same basic functions
addressed to the same consumers,
sold on the same channels of sale
or in the same price zones.
An assortment is characterized
by three concepts
width and depth.
Width is the number of models
that the company offers.
Let's go back to the car market.
In particular,
Renault offers 10 models of cars.
This characterizes its range of assortment.
Smart offers only two models of assortment.
Accordingly, Smart has an assortment
narrower than Renault.
Depth of the assortment is
the number of modifications
of the models you offer.
That is, how different
your offers are.
Depth of the assortment allows
to adapt the same model
for different price groups,
that is, to offer more choices to consumers.
Length of the assortment is
a total of all modifications
of the models that you can
offer to the market.
It is important to understand
that width and length of the assortment
have no linear dependence
on the volume of sales.
Pay attention to the graph.
This is a fading curve.
Moreover, it can
go down at some point.
What is it connected with?
With the fact that managing a large assortment
is quite expensive.
Expenses for managing an assortment
are increasing at an exceeding rate
to its length.
It is important to understand
that there is a certain
conditional point of optimum
when it makes no sense
to expand your assortment.
You should also understand
that the maximum profit point
is below the optimum point
in terms of sales.
And the expenses are
to blame for this.
Why does such a fading occur?
We have already talked about
the expenses.
On the one hand,
different goods are sold in different ways
in different volumes.
This explains the non-linearity
of expansion and growth.
Secondly,
it is important to understand
that goods have different seasonality.
With a wide assortment
there is often an internal cannibalism
when goods do not increase
the volume of sales together.
One plus one does not make two,
but, for example, one point two tenths
or one point five tenths.
They compete for the same
buyer.
It is also important to understand
the benefits of specialization.
Why is it beneficial for you
to control the assortment
and not to expand it to infinity?
In particular,
you see a graph on the slide.
This is the dependence
on the relative productivity
and the production assortment.
The base point is 100% assortment
and the production is 25-27%.
If you reduce the assortment by half,
the production increases by 25-27%.
If you reduce it by half,
What is the reason for this?
It is related to the effect of experience
and specialization.
The more often you perform
the same operation,
the less you have to switch,
the less you have to pay.
The situation is shown
by another slide.
It is the dependence
of the relative costs
on the production assortment.
Again,
if you reduce the assortment,
the relative costs are reduced.
If you reduce the assortment by half,
the relative costs are reduced
by 20-22%.
The relative costs are not directly
related to the production.
This explains why
the specialists
make the offer
more profitable
in terms of price.
The assortment can be divided
into levels.
There is the top of the assortment
in terms of price
and quality.
There is the bottom of the assortment.
These are the cheapest goods.
And there is the middle of the assortment.
Why do we need
the bottom of the assortment?
It allows us
to protect ourselves
from price wars.
In case of price wars,
we have to fight against them.
This is usually
a minimum quality
for a minimum price.
This is a segment for low-income consumers.
The top of the assortment
is usually
what sets
the reputation and status of the brand.
It is what allows
the company to boast of its achievements,
to get a higher profitability,
to sell more expensive.
The middle of the assortment
was originally considered
as a reasonable quality
for a reasonable price.
It is an optimum.
It is what formed the main income of the company.
The world is changing.
The middle of the assortment
is not considered
as a reasonable quality
for a reasonable price.
The middle of the assortment
is not considered
as a reasonable quality
for a reasonable price.
The consumer changes.
He doesn't want a compromise.
He wants the best
and the most expensive
or the cheapest
with a minimum quality.
A few words about the features
First of all,
an image is very important for the luxury goods.
The image is a story,
a high-quality
and a certain know-how.
It is important to understand
that for them
a mass communication is not suitable.
It is a kind of event communication
and a word-for-word communication.
The distribution of the goods
is limited.
They are not sold
in every hypermarket.
It confirms the quality of the brand.
The control of the sales system
is important.
It is a compliance of the standards
of the sales of the goods
and a quality of the service.
As a rule, such companies
use global marketing
because the goods of the luxury class
are not much different
depending on the region.
Let's move on to the question
related to the assortment analysis.
It is important to understand
that the assortment analysis
can be carried out by the type of goods,
by the volume of the goods,
by the profitability
for us
using the models of the Boston Consortium.
The ABC analysis of Dib Simkin,
the analysis of the age of the goods
or on the basis of the life cycle,
as we have already discussed.
Cannibalization.
We need to remember
that we have talked about the positioning of the goods.
The assessment of the attractiveness
of the goods by the consumers
and the use of different models,
for example, the Fishbane model,
which reflects the consumer behavior.
It is important to understand
that certain groups are selected
by the type of goods.
In particular, the leaders of the goods
are the goods that are sold
the most attractive.
The goods of the communicators
or the goods of the honey
that are sold by the consumers
while buying something else.
The goods that prepare the future,
that is, what is being tested,
or opinions are formed.
Tactical goods
in order to win the price war
or replace a certain product
or not to allow the competition
to enter the segment.
You have already said
in the strategic analysis
that the most important thing
is to understand
the characteristics of the goods
We have already talked
in the strategic marketing
about the matrix of the Boston Consulting Group.
This matrix has proven
its effectiveness not only
in strategic aspects,
but also in the analysis of the assortment.
The only thing is
that this is a modified matrix.
We use the internal information
of the company.
So, along the X-axis
we put the volume of the product sales.
Along the Y-axis
we put the growth rates
in relation to the previous period.
As a rule, the previous period
is the previous year.
And analyzing,
it is important
or you can take
the appropriate time intervals.
For example,
take 3 months of the first quarter of 2008
in relation to the first quarter of 2007.
Such an approach
allows us
to avoid
the influence of seasonality
on our analysis.
So, the X-axis
is the volume of the product sales
in money,
that is, either in rubles or dollars,
on which your business account
or euro is built.
The Y-axis is the growth rates
calculated by the formula
the volume of sales in 2008
divided by the volume of sales
for the corresponding period
of 2007 minus 1.
Or according to the years
you plan to analyze.
In these two coordinates
we apply points
on the basis of which we can
make the third measurement,
namely, the proportion of the area of the circle.
The area of the circle reflects
the marginal profitability
of a particular product.
It is the marginal profitability
of the first order.
Let me start
with an example to make it clearer.
Let's imagine
that I am transporting a product
from St. Petersburg to Moscow
by car, Eurofor 82 cubic meters,
20 tons.
Simultaneously
in this car
there is
a glass-coated insulator,
light but voluminous,
Italian tile,
not very heavy,
expensive enough,
high-value,
and, for example, brick,
a heavy product.
If I distribute the cost of transportation
according to the cost,
then the main cost of transportation
will be Italian tile
and it will be very expensive
without it.
If I distribute it by volume,
then practically
the entire cost of transportation
will be distributed to glass-coated insulator.
If I distribute it
by weight,
then the brick will be
a non-profitable product for us.
In fact, all three approaches
are correct, but
they give different results.
That is,
we can make different conclusions.
In order to avoid
such variability,
only direct variable costs
are used.
That is,
the marginal profit of the first order
is nothing more than the revenue
minus the direct variable costs.
Direct variable costs
are the costs
that disappear
if we stop
dealing with this product.
As a rule, we can attribute
the cost of purchasing,
customs duties,
taxes related to this product,
premium sellers for the sale of this product,
advertising,
if this particular product
or product group was advertised.
It is important to understand
that the warehouse
and the control apparatus
are indirect costs.
In this case, we do not take them into account.
So, the size of the circle
is proportional to the
marginal profit of the first order
for this product.
Please note that we get
such a spiky graph.
Accordingly, we can divide it into four squares
like a classic matrix.
Let's find a point on the x-axis
that divides the products
into a significant share in the portfolio
and a small share.
It is quite easy to find.
To do this, we need to divide the sales volume
by the number of products analyzed,
that is, the circles on our graph.
We will get a certain average
sales volume
for one
average product.
Everything that will be
on the left of this point
are products that contribute
a large share in the company's revenue.
Everything on the right
is below the average,
that is, a small contribution to the company's revenue.
On the y-axis,
we need to find a point
that divides the products into
fast-growing and slow-growing.
We can use the average
sales volume of the company.
Namely, we can divide
the sales volume of the company
from 2008 to
the sales volume of the entire company
from 2007 minus one.
Accordingly, everything above
is fast-growing products,
everything below is slow-growing products.
If we draw a line
from these points,
we will get four squares.
The upper square,
which is characterized by high growth rates
and a small contribution
to the sales volume,
is usually new products.
Yesterday one product was sold,
today 10 products,
the growth rate is 100%,
but the contribution to the company's sales volume
is small.
These are products
that are traditionally
loss-making for the company.
They are loss-making
not in terms of the margin
of the first order,
most likely they will not
bring a positive income,
but in terms of the full cost,
in terms of the promotion.
These are products that need to be moved
to the side of the square,
which is called stars.
This square is characterized by high growth rates,
on the one hand,
and on the other hand,
it is characterized by a significant contribution
to the sales volume.
As a rule, these are profitable products,
attractive for the company.
The name, accordingly, is stars.
They grow fast, above the average
and bring a significant
sales volume.
They are interesting,
attractive, but as a rule,
all this profit that the product brings
must be reinvested in it
in order to maintain growth.
If you do not temporarily
withdraw flows,
that is, stop investing
in replenishing the stock,
promotion, expansion of the sales service
and other related processes,
it may happen
that the product will go along the inclined straight,
namely, from the star square
to the square
called the tired dog.
This is a square that
contains products
that do not have
high growth rates
and a significant contribution to sales.
The products are unprofitable and have no prospects.
But if you support the star,
reinvest funds in it,
then after a while
saturation occurs,
recalling the life cycle,
and the product begins to go down into a square
characterized by a significant contribution
to the sales volume of the company,
with a significant profit margin,
but with low growth rates.
This square is called
the tired cow.
It is necessary to reduce
investment budgets in this product,
leave only at the level of
advertising support,
and the money flow
that it generates goes to financing
other squares.
This is the current profit of the company.
Over time,
the tired cow moves
to the square of the tired dog,
and, accordingly,
this is a signal for you that you need to prepare
a restart of the product,
prepare it for modification.
The trajectory of a disaster or an eternal failure
is what you should avoid.
The trajectory of an eternal failure
is when the product
regularly goes from the square
of the wild cat or the question mark
to the square of the tired dog.
The line constantly changes
between high growth rates and low growth rates,
but it does not take a significant share
in the sales volume of the company.
As a rule, such products are subject to reduction.
These are unsuccessful products.
Let's take a closer look at the situation
in the square of the tired dog.
In a good way,
we should part with these products,
exclude them from our range.
They have no prospects,
but they do not make a significant contribution
to the sales volume of the company.
But when we reduce the range,
we should remember four important points.
First, these may seem to be niche products,
which traditionally cannot compete
in sales volume
with the sales of other products of the company.
For example,
if we own a store of office goods
and sell Chinese pens,
the cost of which is 5 rubles,
and Parker Waterman pens,
the cost of which is 50 rubles,
the cost of which is tens of hundreds of times more,
in order to get a comparable profit
from the sale of one Parker pen,
we need to sell 3-4 packages of Chinese pens.
But they will never be sold
in the same volumes as cheap pens.
The second point you should remember
is that by removing the product
from the range,
you should reduce
the constant and indirect costs
in order not to reduce
the profit of the company
or introduce new products
that have prospects
and will take over
some of the constant and indirect costs of the company.
Otherwise,
you will reduce the real profit of the company,
which should not be allowed.
The third point.
These may be products of mutual demand,
and, accordingly,
the reduction of their range
will lead to a much greater
sales volume
than the sales volume of these products.
Let me illustrate with an example.
There is a grocery store.
There is milk and muesli.
Milk is a classic tired dog.
No income, no revenue.
The store usually does not get money from it.
And the product,
the consumption of which
does not grow significantly.
Muesli, in the background of a healthy lifestyle,
is a fast-growing product.
And, secondly,
it is a high-profit product.
But if the store reduces the sale of milk,
then the sale of muesli
will also decrease.
We will not buy muesli in one store,
and not milk in the other.
We will go where both of these products are sold.
Such products are often called
complementary.
And the third point.
You will have to keep products
that somehow reflect
the position of your company,
historically connected.
For example, AXEROX will never be able
to refuse to produce copies.
Sony will refuse to produce
household appliances.
These are the products
that are historically connected with these brands.
And as soon as the refusal is over,
it will be another company.
It will not be AXEROX.
It will not be Sony.
The second matrix that allows us to evaluate
the product portfolio
is the IBC analysis of Diba Simkin.
It is important to understand
that one matrix is not enough
for adequate conclusions.
You should, as a rule, use at least two analyses
that allow you to look at the range
at different angles.
In particular, the Diba Simkin matrix
allows you to analyze the portfolio
in two components.
The volume of sales and the contribution of the coverage of costs.
But instead of the contribution of the coverage of costs,
I think it is worth
using
such an indicator as
the profitability of the product.
The profitability of the product
is the revenue minus the direct variable costs
divided by the revenue.
That is, it is the percentage that reflects
the share of the marginal profit of the first order
in the revenue per product.
The volume of sales
is also measured in money.
The A matrix is 20%
of the number of
the best products,
which is transferred to 80% of the revenue of the company.
We allocate them.
Accordingly,
based on the allocation
of this square
we get
B1, B2 and C.
In the A matrix
there is no need to make changes.
It is your gold fund
that transfers the revenue
and the profit to the company.
The B1 matrix
is the products that
sell well,
but bring a little profit to the company.
The strategy is
to look for ways to reduce the costs
in order to
bring the A matrix as close as possible.
The B2 matrix
is the products that
have a good profitability
for the company,
but are still selling poorly.
Accordingly, do not be greedy.
Invest part of the potential profit
in promotion
so that the products from the B2 matrix
can get closer or move to the A matrix.
The products of the C matrix
should be considered
for reduction,
but taking into account the four points
that we talked about earlier.
The graph on the slide
demonstrates
the essence of the analysis.
The small number of
products of the group
brings the most revenue.
The principle of Pareto is 20 to 80.
You probably have already heard about it.
The expert assessment of the assortment
without extra math
allows you to
evaluate your assortment.
In particular,
it is important to understand
that the product should be convenient
for all the companies.
The supply should be
cheap enough
and effective.
The product should sell well
If there is a failure
on some plot,
the product is not attractive.
As a rule, this product has no significant prospects
in terms of its market success.
In order to conduct an analysis,
you need to first of all
deal with the goals of the company.
What is a priority for you?
What is the strategy?
In accordance with this strategy,
each unit involved in the analysis
and this unit,
in one way or another,
the additional cost of the product
is given.
It depends on the goals.
If the task is to increase
the volume of revenue now,
the sales department will get the most.
If it is necessary
to assess the potential
sales of goods,
that is, the future prospects of the company,
the marketing department will get the most.
If the task is to maximize the profit of the company,
then, of course, the best view of the profit
or the most adequate
will be provided by the financial service.
The supply department will assess
the availability of resources,
that is, what you can save.
If you have your own production,
then, accordingly, you need to include
the production unit.
On a ten-point scale,
each product is assessed
according to the specified criteria.
For example, the marketing department
has a perspective, the sales department
has a simple sales or attractiveness
for customers at the moment,
the product profitability department,
the supply department has a perspective
on the availability of resources,
the possibility of cheap delivery.
Accordingly, the product
that received the highest average rating,
which is like the sum of the products,
the weight on the assessment
of this particular product,
accordingly,
it must be promoted
to the market
and the possibility
of excluding goods
that received a low rating,
that is,
they have no prospect from the company's point of view.
Dmitry Borovinsky's analysis
allows you to develop
a system of ratings
or explain the demand
from the client.
What does Borovinsky say?
That you need to make a brainstorm
and set independent
criteria for each other,
that is, such as the volume of advertising,
the advantage in price,
the packaging, for example.
There can be quite a lot of them.
Each criterion gets its weight
from the point of view of the client,
that is, what is more important for the client.
Next, according to each of the criteria,
we evaluate the goods,
but in this case we should analyze
the goods that are homogeneous
from our assortment
and from the assortment of competitors.
Accordingly, we also find the product rating,
that is,
the amount of products,
the weight of the product,
the criterion for the evaluation of a particular product.
What is the logic?
In this case,
the logic is that the higher the product rating,
the higher the volume of sales.
If this is not the case,
that is, the correlation coefficient
of the rows of ratings
and the volume of sales
does not tend to one,
then we are somewhere wrong.
Where? In the ratings?
Hardly.
Most likely, we were wrong
in the client's view of the product attractiveness.
And you need to choose the weights
in such a way
that the correlation coefficient
of the rating or the evaluation of the goods
and the volume of sales
tends to one.
What do we get in the end?
We get the importance
of those or other criteria for the client
when choosing a product.
On the other hand, we get, in principle,
a prediction of the volume of sales
of non-existing or not yet
released goods on the market.
Namely, we can add product 4,
product 5, product 6,
drive along this matrix.
And if the rating will lie
between 3 and 4, 3 and 8,
as in this example,
then I dare to assume
that the volume of sales
will lie between 987 and 1597.
A more interesting possibility
for use
or analogy of this analysis
is the multiplicity regression.
The Fishbein model also allows us
to evaluate the attractiveness of a product
or its competitiveness.
This model is based on
the compensatory principle
of choosing a product.
That is, when a client chooses a product
based on the sum of criteria
depending on the importance
of a particular criteria for him.
But Fishbein has introduced
a rather interesting point.
He says that
the importance of a particular criteria
is not always the one
that the client calls
and there is a place to be
in the choice of this product.
Fishbein says that it is necessary
to increase the importance
of those parameters
by which goods have the greatest difference
and vice versa to reduce the importance
of those criteria
by which goods differ insignificantly.
Let's illustrate this on an example.
If I ask you
what is important for you
in terms of the bank
in which you will take a mortgage loan,
you will most likely name
the interest rate on this loan,
the probability of withdrawing the loan,
and possibly
service maintenance.
And let's say the fourth
and very insignificant parameter
is the distance
from your new place of residence
to the bank branch.
We do not give this
much importance yet,
although we have 15 years left
and we will have to pay
certain payments
every month
in the account of the loan.
So,
if we look at the market
from the client's point of view,
it will turn out that the interest rates
in many banks are the same
and differ insignificantly.
The probability of withdrawing a loan
is also unified.
The level of service
is not the most client-oriented organization
and, again,
it is at the same low level.
So,
this is not the decisive factor for us.
The decisive factor
is that small
and insignificant parameter
in which banks
differ principally
in terms of the distance
from your new place of residence.
This is the basic logic
that allows us to consider the Fishbein model.
Let's look at the question
of determining the interrelated demand.
How to determine
if you have complementary goods,
goods whose sales volume
is interrelated to each other?
Remember the example
I gave about milk and muesli.
How to determine?
In fact,
mathematical methods
for determining the interrelated demand
are necessary.
You need to build a matrix
where columns are the names of individual goods,
and lines are the individual checks,
if it is a retail store,
or the invoice account
that you issued to the client,
invoice account,
or requests.
Why?
Because the loading documents usually reflect
what you had in the warehouse
and you were able to unload.
And not what the client asked.
In the cross-sections of the goods' accounts,
we mark either 0
or 1,
that is,
binary logic.
0 if the goods are not present
in this account,
1 if the goods are present.
Accordingly,
if I need to see
whether the demand of goods 1
and goods 2
is interrelated,
I just need to calculate
the correlation between
column 1 and column 2.
If the correlation coefficient
is more than 0.68,
then the correlation is already
considered significant,
and you need to pay special attention
to these goods
to figure out
which of them is the branch,
and which is the leading one.
Often people ask
whether it is possible
to have a goods
in the characteristics of the matrix
of the Boston Consulting Group
or a goods
that is at the end
of its life cycle,
revive it,
turn it into a star
or provide it with rapid growth.
Igor Yantsev,
an American of Russian origin,
offers us 4 ways.
The first way is
to stay on the existing market
for existing clients.
Or to easily modify the product.
The second way
is to come out
with a new product
for existing clients.
The third way
is to bring
the existing product
to the new market,
not necessarily the regional one,
meaning the market from the point of view
of consumers.
If
for example
we stick
a special glue
on the walls
of the book,
it can come out
with the same glue
to the new market,
where the glue
should stay on the surface
where we stick it,
but not on the surface
where we stick it.
In particular,
such glue is used
in the construction business.
The painting tape
is designed
on the basis
of this glue.
The fourth way
is to bring
a new product to the new market.
It is diversification.
Of course,
the risks associated with such actions
are different.
Yantsev's way means
that the modification of the product
is 50-50.
Even the change of the packaging
may lead to the reduction of the volume
of the product.
On the other hand,
the possibility of success
is only 20%.
Why?
Because the new market
means new conditions.
In marketing,
it is considered
extremely important
to know the consumer.
Such knowledge appears
only in the process of experience
of interaction with the client.
The probability of bringing
new products to existing clients
is estimated at 30%.
The probability of success
in diversification
is 5%,
or even less.
Why? Because you enter
a new market and a new product.
But in the next graph
the higher the risk,
the higher the potential
profit and revenue of the company.
Accordingly,
you should plan your portfolio
not only in terms of potential
sales volume,
but also in terms of the risks
associated with these actions.
The Matrix of McKinsey General Electric
can also be used
when analyzing the assortment.
This matrix differs from the matrix
of the Boston Consulting Group
If the matrix of the Boston Consulting Group
is absolutely objective,
it is numbers,
which are difficult to play with,
not taking into account
a number of high-quality parameters,
the Matrix of McKinsey General Electric
allows you to do this.
We evaluate in two axes
the market attractiveness of the product
for us and for the company,
how convenient it is to produce it,
what is the profitability
of this product,
potential growth,
and so on.
For us, as for investors,
on the other hand,
the strong sides,
namely the client's opinion
of how competitive we are in this market.
Accordingly, we can determine
based on a criteria analysis
two coordinates,
attractiveness for us
and strong sides or competitiveness of the product.
Depending on the position
in two axes,
we can determine
how much money
this product has.
The quadrant is a significant market attractiveness
and significant strong sides for the business.
Accordingly, these are the products
in which we should invest the maximum
of funds and efforts.
It is in this quadrant
that everything is
will bring us a significant success.
The other extreme
is a minor attractiveness
and minor strong sides
We get profit from this product
while it is there,
we get rid of it as soon as the product becomes
unprofitable.
The intermediate action is the selective growth.
For example, we invest in a product
only in those segments
where it is the strongest
or has growth prospects,
or in those markets
where it makes sense.
But we do not make
mass investments,
they should be accurate.
Or we get profit
and refuse to invest
until the product brings profit.
Let's imagine
that you have conducted an analysis
of your product portfolio
and you are not satisfied.
What conclusions should be drawn from this?
First of all,
these actions should be regular.
If you are engaged in cellular communication,
where the life cycle
of one phone model
is about 3-6 months,
then you should conduct
a full-scale assortment analysis
once a quarter.
If you work in markets
associated with minor changes,
for example,
the raw material market,
then it is possible that the analysis
should be conducted once every 5 years.
For most companies, the next time cycle is suitable.
Namely, once every six months
we conduct an intermediate assessment analysis,
that is, whether we are going the right way,
whether we have made a mistake,
whether we are on the right path of product movement.
And once a year we conduct a thorough assessment
of the work per year,
as well as the planning of the portfolio
for the next year.
If you are not satisfied with the product portfolio,
then it is important for you to realize
the following point,
that you should treat the implementation of changes
as a project,
for which funds, people and time are allocated.
Otherwise,
no matter how much you solve the problem,
it can only be aggravated.
This problem is obvious
on the matrix of the Boston Consulting Group.
Let's recall it.
Stars are your profit tomorrow,
a milk cow is your profit today,
wild cats or question marks
are your profit the day after tomorrow.
That is, a kind of life cycle
folded in half.
And if a company
does not have star products,
it means that after some time
it will experience problems with profitability,
and already now it experiences problems
with the pace of sales growth.
Because a large number of products
in the matrix of the question mark
or wild cats
creates additional load
on the company's profit,
but often does not become
star products.
Accordingly,
the product portfolio
should be weighted,
should be full,
but any changes
should be taken as a very serious project.
The next point
that you need to remember
is that even the best goods
need to be promoted.
You need to give time
to the diffusion of the product
on the market,
and on the other hand
to leave some of the investment
for the start of the project
on the market,
for the advertising campaign
of a new product.
In this case,
you will be able to get a premium profit,
and the product will be easier
to enter the market.
But study the foreign experience
of innovation
and apply it in your business.
As a result of this block,
I ask you to complete
two tasks.
Task 7.
Conduct an IBC analysis
for the company's products
in which you work.
How can you contribute
the movement of your goods and services
from Group C, B1, B2
to Groups of higher position A?
Task 8.
Give examples of the methods
that you use
when evaluating the product assortment
of your company and compare
the methods given in the textbook
to the subject of the match.
Evaluate the versatility of approaches
to the assortment analysis
and try to analyze the assortment
of methods that you are not familiar with
or have not had the opportunity to use.